Now for the follow up from the previous video.
You are going to dig more deeply into patching attention heads and the IOI experiments, but patching
individual heads within each layer.
Let's begin with exercise one.
The goal here is to set up for the experiment.
Now, most of the code you can copy from the code file for the previous video.
But don't just copy and paste blindly because you know, the entire reason why you're watching this
video is because you want to understand and not just copy.
Anyway, for starters, import the large version of GPT two, then tokenize the same two sentences that
we used in the previous video.
Create hooks that you implant to get all of the attention.
Head activations from text version A, you should also check the sizes of the activation matrices and
make sure you understand what all these numbers mean, where they come from, what they correspond to,
etc..
Finally, calculate the IOI score from the clean data.
As you know, these values will be the baseline comparison values for when we run the experiment in
the next exercise.
I don't think this exercise will take you very long after having gone through the previous video.
I will now switch to code, but only briefly to make sure we're all on the same page before proceeding
to the main experiment in the next exercise.
So here we are.
I'm importing GPT two large and pushing it to the GPU.
Here is the text exactly the same as in the previous video.
Here I'm defining some convenience variables as I've done before, including this one for the number
of tokens.
Okay.
And then this code you've seen exactly before.
This is getting the activations from all of the heads reshaped, so that we can easily index each individual
head from, uh, from text sequence A, and remember that this reshaping wasn't necessary in the previous
video because there I replaced all the heads and all the tokens, and that's not what I'm going to do
here.
Okay.
So here.
Yeah.
You've also seen this exactly in the previous video and also this stuff.
So really not too much new here compared to what you have already done in the previous video.
This exercise is the main experiment.
You can start by copying the experiment code from the previous video, but remember that in the previous
video I patched all of the heads and all of the tokens.
So now in this experiment here, you are going to do a much more targeted manipulation.
You can see that I have an embedded for loop over all of the heads.
So we're looping over all of the layers and then looping over all of the heads within each layer.
So now inside this hook function you replace the head activation vectors from the donor model, but
only for one head at a time and only for the final token.
Otherwise, the concept of this for loop and the experiment is the same as the previous video.
Again, the difference is that here you are patching one head at a time and only the final token next
for the visualization.
Now, what you're looking at right now is not the visualization that you will create in this exercise.
This is a screenshot from the previous video where we had only one data point per layer per transformer
block, but now we have one data point per block per head.
So I'm not going to tell you exactly how to visualize the results, because I want to give you the freedom
to make your own decisions.
Of course, when I switch to code, I will show you what I did to visualize these results.
But suffice it to say that somehow you want to visualize all the results over all the layers and all
of the heads.
If you have multiple ideas for how to visualize the results, then you can make multiple visualizations.
That is great.
Okay, and now you should pause the video and run the experiment and see how the results look.
And now I will switch to code.
I hope you didn't have too much trouble getting this exercise together.
So looping over all the layers, looping over all the heads within each layer.
And then here is the hook function.
Now remember in the previous video this line of code looked something like this.
Or wait it looked like this.
That's what it looked like.
So in the previous video, we copied all the heads for this one layer and all of the tokens.
And what we're doing now is much more targeted.
So we're only copying over the final token and only copying over one head corresponding to this iteration.
In this for loop over all of the heads.
And now you see why it's convenient to reshape this input so we can easily access each head dimension.
That said, this reshaping is not necessary at all.
You could also come up with an indexing to index right into this tensor.
And you know, that would be something like head I times head dim.
This would be the start location.
And then you would have to add another head.
It would be something like this.
You could figure it out if you want.
But anyway.
Okay.
So that is that.
And why are we manipulating the final token.
Well that is the token that the model is then using to generate the prediction for the next token,
which is what we will explicitly measure here.
That said, if you are curious, you could also try doing other manipulations.
So for example, you could try instead of overwriting this the attention vectors here, you could try
overwriting the attention vectors for this word here this token either Sam or Sally.
So basically you're going to patch the attention vectors for Sam onto the attention vectors for Sally.
Just an idea.
Just if you want to continue exploring this experiment.
Okay.
So after that, the rest of this code is really exactly the same as in the previous video, but now
this variable logit diffs.
Previously, we only had one value per layer.
Now we have one value per head per layer.
Okay, on the GPU this doesn't take too long to run through.
I haven't timed this on the CPU.
Maybe it's several minutes or something, but it still is.
You know, it's a pretty respectable experiment we're running here.
It's all of the layers and all of the heads in the large version of GPT two.
So, you know, it takes.
Okay, 20s not so bad.
All right.
Uh, let's see.
So here is the visualization that I made here.
And what you see is it looks like there's only one dot per transformer block, but in fact there are.
Let me see.
I don't know how many heads there are off the top of my head.
Okay, there's 20 heads in this version of GPT two.
So each of these circles is actually 20 circles, but they all have nearly identical values.
And so therefore they're all basically lying all on top of each other.
Here you see a little bit more diversity.
Basically what's happening is that early in the model patching one head for one token did I'm reluctant
to say the word absolutely nothing.
But it did so little that on this scale it is not visually detectable.
And then we see later in the model we do get some modulations.
It looks like most of the time it goes down a little bit, although sometimes it actually goes up which
is in the opposite direction as we might expect.
But yeah, it's certainly not an overwhelming effect.
It's a really subtle, really mild effect.
It's way, way, way smaller compared to what we saw when we patched over all of the, uh, the embeddings
vectors at the output of the transformer block.
It's also considerably smaller than even the relatively subtle effects that we saw in the previous video,
where we were patching over all of the heads and all of the tokens.
So a very subtle effect.
One more thing I want to say before switching to exercise three that I forgot to mention is in the previous
video, I also incorporated more code into this hook function and into this loop to compare the activations
from the two different token sequences as a code check, as a manipulation check, just to make sure
that the code was working.
And basically I decided to exclude that check here that sanity check from this code, just because I
felt like I've already confirmed that it works from the previous video.
And now this is basically the same code.
So I decided not to include that sanity check in here.
So that manipulation was quite subtle.
On the one hand, that's probably not surprising given how subtle the effect was from the previous video
where we manipulated all the heads and all the tokens.
And so it's just going to be the case that the more precise and targeted the manipulation, the less
of a global impact it will have.
But the question that we want to explore here in this exercise is why the effect was so big when we
manipulated the hidden states.
So the output of the transformer block, and why it was so small here when we manipulated just the attention
heads which are inside of the transformer blocks.
To gain some insight into this, I want you to write down an equation for the output of a transformer
block.
Your equation should incorporate the attention, the MLP, and the layernorm components of the transformer.
And then when you write out those equations, I want you to pinpoint the terms in those equations that
you actually just manipulated in exercise two.
And I think that will help you understand why the effect size was small.
Now there are multiple correct ways of mathematically describing the output of a transformer block.
You can write a sequence of like really, really detailed equations, or you can write some more general
equations that abstract away some of the details.
I'm going to show you the equations that I wrote down in a moment, but I also want to make it clear
that there are multiple correct ways of describing a transformer block at different levels of granularity.
The point is to refresh your understanding of what happens inside a transformer block, and how the
attention calculations fit into that.
So pause the video now.
But there's no coding here.
You just write down some equations on a piece of paper with a pencil.
And now I will go to the next slide and show the equations that I wrote down.
This final line here is the output of a transformer block.
It is equal to the input into the transformer block, plus the adjustment from the attention sub block,
plus the adjustment from the MLP sub block.
The delta attention term is defined as the attention function applied to the input to the transformer
block.
After applying the Layernorm, and some of those attention adjustments also get absorbed into the MLP.
And I think you see what I mean with my comment that there are multiple correct ways to write down this
equation here.
For example, I'm abstracting away all the math of the attention and the MLP sub blocks.
Because what I really want to do here is focus on this delta a term.
This is the actual term that we manipulated in this experiment.
and we didn't even manipulate the entire delta.
A we just manipulated one little piece of Delta A because we only replaced one head and one token,
and then all of that information got mixed together by the W0 mixing matrix in this attention function
here.
What I hope you appreciate from this slide is that the thing that we actually changed in this experiment
is really tiny, relative to the entirety of the computations taking place inside a transformer block.
So given that it's not really that surprising that the impact was subtle.
In fact, you could turn it around and say, it's actually pretty remarkable that such a tiny, precise
manipulation that we did even had any numerical impact on the final model output logits.
Now, to be clear, this is not necessarily a bad thing.
In scientific research, when you are trying to understand a complex system, taking a sledgehammer
to the entire network is certainly a good place to start.
But the more you learn, and the more theories and findings develop, the more precise and subtle you
will need to be to discover more nuanced mechanisms.
And that's where I'd like to close this video.
It is a general phenomenon in science that as a field progresses and as knowledge increases, the experiments
and manipulations become more precise and more nuanced.
And that means that the effect sizes will get smaller, which means that it's important to have a good
hypothesis and theoretical framework for interpreting the results and a sufficient amount of data,
so that you can be confident about the robustness of even small effects.